Commit early draft of paper (#1)
linebender/gpu-stroke-expansion-paper: paper.tex

\documentclass[format=acmsmall]{acmart}
\begin{document}
\title{GPU-friendly Stroke Expansion}
\author{Raph Levien}
\author{Arman Uguray}
\affiliation{
    \institution{Google}
    \city{San Francisco}
    \state{CA}
    \country{USA}
}

\begin{abstract}

>     Vector graphics includes both filled and stroked paths as the main primitives. While there have been many proposed techniques for rendering filled paths on GPU, stroked paths have proved more elusive. This paper presents a technique for performing stroke expansion, namely the generation of an outline representing the stroke of the given input path, an operation which is considered global, but which we nonetheless implement using a fully parallel algorithm. Our method relies on several novel techniques, including an encoding of the input suitable for parallel decoding and processing, an Euler spiral based method for computing flattened parallel curves. While we focus on flattened output consisting of polylines, the methods can be adapted to preserving curves in the output as well.

Reviewer: (highlighting my suggested modifications in bold and non-italic and removals as strikethrough):

> Our method relies on several novel techniques, including an encoding of the input suitable for parallel decoding and processing, an Euler spiral based method for computing flattened parallel curves.

This sentence reads like it's incomplete. How about:

**We introduce** _several novel techniques, including an encoding of_ **stroked primitives** _suitable for parallel ~~decoding and~~ processing_ **and** _an Euler spiral based method for computing flattened parallel curves._

>     Vector graphics includes both filled and stroked paths as the main primitives. While there have been many proposed techniques for rendering filled paths on GPU, stroked paths have proved more elusive. This paper presents a technique for performing stroke expansion, namely the generation of an outline representing the stroke of the given input path, an operation which is considered global, but which we nonetheless implement using a fully parallel algorithm. Our method relies on several novel techniques, including an encoding of the input suitable for parallel decoding and processing, an Euler spiral based method for computing flattened parallel curves. While we focus on flattened output consisting of polylines, the methods can be adapted to preserving curves in the output as well.

Reviewer: I feel like the clause *an operation which is considered global* and what follows sound a bit cryptic, since the paragraph hasn't explained what "global" means and why it is counter to parallelism. Perhaps a preceding sentence should more clearly present the parallelism challenge to establish context.

>     Vector graphics includes both filled and stroked paths as the main primitives. While there have been many proposed techniques for rendering filled paths on GPU, stroked paths have proved more elusive. This paper presents a technique for performing stroke expansion, namely the generation of an outline representing the stroke of the given input path, an operation which is considered global, but which we nonetheless implement using a fully parallel algorithm. Our method relies on several novel techniques, including an encoding of the input suitable for parallel decoding and processing, an Euler spiral based method for computing flattened parallel curves. While we focus on flattened output consisting of polylines, the methods can be adapted to preserving curves in the output as well.

Reviewer: Perhaps we should conclude the abstract with an assertion of some of the accomplishments, e.g.:

_Our method produces a near-optimal number of line segments for the filled outline of a stroked cubic Bézier and can be fully evaluated on a GPU with minimal preprocessing._

I considered adding a "_supports all common cap and join styles_" to that sentence but I'm not entirely sure if that needs to be mentioned in the abstract.

\end{abstract}

\maketitle
\thispagestyle{empty}
\pagestyle{plain}

\section{Introduction}

> Rendering of vector graphics documents requires handling both filled and stroked primitives. There is substantial literature on GPU rendering of filled paths, but many fewer published techniques for strokes. It is a more challenging problem, especially for parallel computation, because path segments cannot be processed independently of each other; the \emph{joins} between adjacent path segments depend on context. In addition, the path topology affects the rendered result, in particular whether subpaths are open or closed. In the former case, the endpoints are rendered with \emph{caps}. Joins and caps can have multiple styles, including different styles within the same document.

Reviewer: I think the sentence explaining the challenging nature of stroking should mention curve offsetting as one of the challenges. Some suggestions (feel free to rephrase and/or reject them at your discretion):

```suggestion
Rendering of vector graphics documents requires handling both filled and stroked primitives. The most common type of primitive is a \emph{path} composed of one or more sequences of connected Bézier curve segments. There is substantial literature on GPU rendering of filled paths, but many fewer published techniques for strokes. Rendering of stroked primitives is a more challenging problem: i) it is necessary to compute the parallel curves outlining the stroked shape at a fixed distance from the source curve, a computationally expensive procedure that must account for discontinuities; ii) path segments cannot be processed independently of each other, as adjacent segments must be \emph{joined} without breaking the smoothness of the contour. In addition, the path topology affects the rendered result, in particular whether subpaths are open or closed. In the former case, the endpoints are rendered with \emph{caps}. Joins and caps can have multiple styles, including different styles within the same document.
```

> The \cite{Nehab2020} paper gives a comprehensive survey of techniques for stroke expansion, and an algorithm which, for a number of reasons, is only suitable for implementation on CPU (though adapting it to GPU is listed as promising future work). It classifies techniques into \emph{local,} where each path segment generates closed geometry (which may be triangles or other primitives), and \emph{global,} where the overall result is a closed outline of the stroked path, but the partial result from each segment is in general open. Our technique is considered global in this scheme, yet allows independent processing of each path segment.

Reviewer: nit: the \cite{Nehab2020} bit appears weird in the PDF. My LaTeX-fu is rusty but I'm guessing that can be fixed with styling?

Author: I think the thing to do here is apply the correct template. I'm actually not sure why I picked this one.

> The \cite{Nehab2020} paper gives a comprehensive survey of techniques for stroke expansion, and an algorithm which, for a number of reasons, is only suitable for implementation on CPU (though adapting it to GPU is listed as promising future work). It classifies techniques into \emph{local,} where each path segment generates closed geometry (which may be triangles or other primitives), and \emph{global,} where the overall result is a closed outline of the stroked path, but the partial result from each segment is in general open. Our technique is considered global in this scheme, yet allows independent processing of each path segment.

Reviewer: > ...and an algorithm which, for a number of reasons, is only suitable for implementation on CPU...

We should probably explain what those reasons are, somewhere in the paper.

> A number of factors contribute to an algorithm being ``GPU-friendly.'' In addition to simply being able to process the input segments in parallel, such an algorithm also avoids divergent control flow (including subdivision for special events such as inflection points and cusps), uses straightforward numerical techniques not subject to particular problems when evaluated using 32-bit floating point numbers.

Reviewer: nit: connect the two sub-sentences. Personally, I would also replace "straightforward" with "robust":

_...for special events such as inflection points and cusps)_ **and** _uses ~~straightforward~~_ **robust** _numerical techniques..._

> We propose that the correctness of stroke outlines be divided into \emph{weak correctness} and \emph{strong correctness.} The latter is defined as the computing the outline of a line swept along the segment, maintaining normal orientation, combined with stroke caps and joins. Weak correctness, by contrast, only requires the parallel curves of stroke segments, combined with caps and the outer contours of joins. For sufficiently well-behaved input (particularly when the curvature measured at endpoints of path segements does not exceed the reciprol of the half linewidth), the two notions are equivalent. As described in detail in \cite{Nehab2020}, very few existing implementations actually implement the strong version, so document authors have become accustomed to not depending on behavior at endpoints. Standards for graphics formats also provide an ``out,'' enabling the weaker behavior. [TODO: find language in SVG standard]. While our method emphasizes weak correctness, it likely can be extended to the stronger sense, by implementing evolutes and inner join contours.

Reviewer: A few small suggestions:

```suggestion
We propose that the correctness of stroke outlines be divided into \emph{weak correctness} and \emph{strong correctness.} We define strong correctness as the computation of the outline of a line swept along the segment, maintaining normal orientation, combined with stroke caps and joins. Weak correctness, by contrast, only requires the parallel curves of stroke segments, combined with caps and the outer contours of joins. The two notions are equivalent for sufficiently well-behaved input, in particular when the curvature measured at endpoints of path segments does not exceed the reciprocal of the half linewidth. As described in detail in \cite{Nehab2020}, very few existing implementations actually implement the strong version, so document authors have become accustomed to not depending on behavior at endpoints. Standards for graphics formats also provide an ``out,'' enabling the weaker behavior. [TODO: find language in SVG standard]. While our method emphasizes weak correctness, we believe it can be extended to the stronger sense, by implementing evolutes and inner join contours.
```

Author: Hopefully this will be out of date. I've made most of the changes, and I think we can refine.

> 

Reviewer: I would like to add a TODO here to discuss more of the prior art (similarly to Nehab2020) and perhaps describe how some of the more prominent techniques like NVPR handle strokes? A mention of the difficulty of the curve offsetting and flattening problems would be good to motivate the rest of the paper.

I think the introduction should also introduce the stroke-to-fill conversion problem, since that's what the flattening algorithm implements.

> 

Reviewer: I would end the introduction with a lightning tour of the rest of the paper, briefly touching on what each section is going to present.
